So, let us look at a formal algorithm to explore
a graph. So, recall that a graph consists
of a set of vertices and a set of edges, the
edges are the connections between the vertices,
they may be directed or undirected.
So, if we look at undirected graph, the problem
we are looking at is to find out, whether
a source vertex is connected to a target vertex.
And we said that this amounts to finding a
path from v 0 the source vertex to v k the
target vertex, where each pair of vertices
on the path is connected by an edge in the
graph.
So, we argued that we could easily do this
for small graphs visually, but if you want
to write an algorithm, we need a way of representing
the graph. So, the first thing we decided
was, that we would name the vertices 1 to
n. So, we have n vertices, we will just call
them 1, 2, 3, 4 up to n. Then we can represent
the structure of the graph through an adjacency
matrix.
In this adjacency matrix, the i j’th entry
indicates the presence or absence of an edge
from vertex i to vertex j. So, a i j is 1,
there is an edge, a i j is 0, if there is
no edge. In this matrix, if you want to find
out, whether pair of vertices are directly
connecting, we just have to probe the appropriate
entry, we can do that in constant time. To
find all the outgoing neighbors of a vertex,
we have to scan the row for that vertex. So,
that takes linear time in terms of the number
of vertices. Now, one thing we observed is
that, typically in many graphs, this matrix
is largely 0, most pairs are not connected.
So, we can get a more compact representation
by just listing out the neighbors of each
vertex. So, instead of keeping a row of 1’s
and 0’s, we just record those vertices,
whose entries are 1. So, this gives us a more
efficient representation for graphs, where
the number of edges is closer to the number
of vertices. But, in this case in order to
find out, whether a given pair i j is connected,
we have to look at the list for i and see,
if j appears in it.
Now, our strategy for finding a path connecting
a source vertex and a target vertex, goes
as follows, we would start at the source vertex
and keep exploring the graph systematically.
Each time, we went to a vertex, we would mark
it as visited, and then we have to make sure,
that when we were exploring vertices, we did
not re-explore the same vertex twice. So,
we said there would be two fundamental strategies
breadth first and depth first. So, today we
are going to look at breadth first search.
So, the idea of breadth first search is to
explore the graph level by level. So, we start
at the source vertex and we now explore all
the vertices, which are one step away, connected
by a direct edge to the source vertex. Then,
we look at all vertices which are newly connected
one step away from level 1 vertices. So, these
are two steps away from the source vertex,
then for three steps and so on.
Now, while we are doing this exploration,
we have to keep track of two quantities, we
have to first note of course, whether a given
vertex has been visited. Has it been explored,
is it connected to the source vertex, also
for each such vertex, we have to explore its
neighbors. So, for each vertex, we need to
know, a, has it been visited and we may not
be able to explore it as soon as it is visited.
So, we need to remember that we have explored
it or not explored it and those which are
not explored, we have to make sure we explore
them once.
So, the way to do this is to use some data
structures to keep track of these quantities.
As we said the set of vertices is numbered
1 to n. So, we can keep an array visited with
entries 1 to n, which tells us whether or
not vertex i has been visited. Now, whenever
we visit a vertex, we need to subsequently
explore it. Since, we may not explore it immediately,
we may have to keep it pending for a while.
So, we have to keep a collection of these
vertices, which have been visited, but not
yet been explored.
There are many ways to do this, but one natural
way is to explore them in the order in which
they were visited. So, if we want to explore
in the order in which they were visited, a
natural data structure to keep the list of
unexplored, but visited vertices is a queue.
So, we put each visited vertex into the queue,
the first time we come to it, and then we
process all the vertices in the queue, until
all vertices have been explored.
So, here is some high level Pseudo code for
breadth first search, when we reach a vertex
i which we have visited for the first time,
we will eventually explore it. What does it
mean to explore a vertex, we look at the outgoing
edges i comma j, if j has already been visited,
we are nothing to do. On the other hand, if
j has not been visited, then we will mark
it as visited and add it to the queue to be
explore later.
So, we begin by marking the source vertex
and adding it to the queue and at each stage,
we will explore the vertex at the head of
the queue. If at some stage, there are no
vertices in the queue, it means that every
vertex, we have visited has been explored
and so there is no new information left and
we can stop the exploration.
So, before giving the actual code for breadth
first search, let us workout the example that
we have and see, how these data structures
are updated. So, we have these 10 vertices
1 to 10 and we are looking for paths starting
at 1. So, in the queue, we have two pointers
as usual, we have a pointer which we indicate
in green, which is the head of the queue,
and a pointer red, which is the tail of the
queue.
So, we initialize the queue to have the starting
vertex 1 and we also mark this vertex has
been visited. Now, we have to explore 1, so
what we do is we remove 1 from the queue and
systematically check each of its outgoing
edges and if those target vertices are not
already visited, we add that. So, 2 is the
first in order of 1 to 10, first neighbor
of 1, it has not been visited, so we add it
to the queue and mark 2 as visited in the
visited array.
Likewise, we mark 3 as visited, and then we
mark 4 as visited, at this stage, we have
finished exploring vertex 1. So, now, we go
back to the queue and see, if there is anything
yet to be explore, which have been visited
and there is we pick up the first such namely
2. So, I remove 2 from the queue and we explore
its outgoing neighbors. Now, the outgoing
neighbors of 2 in this case are 1 and 3. But,
since 1 and 3 are both visited, we have no
work to do and we go on and go back to the
queue.
So in the next stage, we pick up the vertex
3 and we look at its outgoing neighbors. Again,
it has outgoing neighbors 1 and 2, both of
which are already visited, so there is nothing
to be done. We come back to the queue and
pickup 4 and try to explore it. So, 4 has
a neighbor 1, which has already been visited,
the next neighbor is 5, since 5 is new we
added to the queue and we mark it as visited,
then it has a neighbor 8. So, we add that
also to the queue and mark it as visited.
Now, we have finished exploring 4. So, we
go back to the queue and look for the next
thing to be explored, which in this case is
5. So, 5 has got neighbors 4, 6 and 7; 4 has
already been visited, but 6 is new and so
is 7. Now, we go back and explore 8, so 8
has neighbors 4, 6 and 9; 4 and 6 are old,
but 9 is new, we add 9 to the queue. Now,
we go back and explore 6, because 6 is the
vertex at the head of the queue.
So, now, we look at neighbors of 6, neighbors
of 6 are 5, 7, 8 and 9. So, when we remove
6 from the queue, we have nothing to do, we
go back and find that, there is nothing to
be done, because all the neighbors of 6 have
already been visited. Then, we pick up 7;
once again we find that all the neighbors
of 7 have already been visited. Finally, we
pickup 9 and when we pickup 9, we find that
it has neighbors 6, 8 and 10, 10 is new, so
10 gets marked and added to the queue.
Finally, we go to 10, we find it has only
one neighbor 9, which is already visited,
at this stage the queue becomes empty and
the algorithm terminates. Now, in this case,
we have marked all the vertices as visited,
which indicates that every vertex in this
graph is actually reachable from 1. If we
had had more vertices, for example, if we
had add a component in this graph; that is
nothing to stop us from having many components
we could have a graph with more vertices 11,
12, 13 and 14. Then this process starting
from 1 would have left 11, 12, 13 and 14 marked
as unvisited.
So, here is some more formal code for BFS,
so BFS is a function which takes as it is
argument, the vertex from where we want to
explore the graph. So, as we said the vertices
are called 1 to n, we have this array visited,
which is initialized to 0 and we have a queue
to mark the vertices still to be explored,
this is initialized to empty. So, we begin
by marking that visited of i equal to 1. So,
vertex i is marked as visited and we added
to the queue.
Now, so long as the queue is not empty, we
proceed in the following loop, we extract
the head of the queue, the vertex to be explored
next. For each of its outgoing edges, if it
is something which has not been visited before,
we mark it as visited and we add it to the
queue. So, this is exactly the code for the
algorithm, we just executed by hand and it
is quiet straight forward. There are two data
structures, an array to keep track of the
visited vertices and a queue to keep track
of vertices which need to be explored further.
So, how do we analyze the complexity of an
algorithm such as this. One way to do it is
to look at the loop. So, remember that, when
we have an algorithm like this which has a
loop, the loop is usually the place where
we have to look for it. So, we have one iteration,
where we have a loop of 1 to n; where we assign,
visited j equal to 0. So, this is something
which takes order n time.
And now, we have a loop here, where we keep
extracting things from the queue and we do
things here. So, we have to kind of understand,
how many times this loop is going to execute
and how much time this inner loop is going
to execute. So, each vertex enters the queue
exactly once. So, if it enters at exactly
once, then it says that this outer loop here
will take order n time.
Because, assuming the graph is connected,
every vertex will be visited once and when
that vertex is visited it will enter the queue
and it will come out from the head of the
queue exactly once. Now, for each vertex,
we have to scan all its neighbors. So, what
we said was that, this will be order n, if
we have an adjacency matrix. Because we need
to go from the first entry for j and we have
to look at the entire row for j, so this is
order n.
So, therefore, the graph is connected first
of all every vertex will get into the queue.
So, we will do the queue loop exactly n times.
And for each j that is extracted, we need
to examine all its neighbors. So, that will
be a scan of size n and therefore, overall
it is order n square, this two nested loops
of size n.
So, this is clearly a situation, where if
we have very few edges, we can improve the
complexity by using an adjacency list representation
instead of an adjacency matrix representation.
So, the number of edges is m and m is much
smaller than n squared. So, if m is say proportional
to n itself, then what we can do is in the
list associated with j, which just have to
look at the neighbors of j. We do not have
to look at all the vertices all of order n
entries in the adjacency matrix, this is called
the degree.
So, the degree of a vertex is the number of
vertices connected to it. So, if we do this,
then what we will find is that, inside the
iteration of the inner loop, each step of
scanning for the neighbors takes time proportional
degree of j. Now, the degree of j of course,
varies from one node to another, so how do
we count this correctly. So, if you do not
count it per loop, but count it across the
entire processing of the entire set of vertices,
what we will see is that for every edge in
the graph, of the form i comma j.
There will be a time and i is process and
I will see j in this list and there will be
a time and j is processed and I will see i
in this list. In other words, if I take all
the adjacency lists of all the vertices, each
edge will be represented twice and an edge
i j will appear as an entry j in the list
for i and an entry i in the list for j. So,
while, it is not easy to count per iteration,
I count across all iterations, I will explore
each edge exactly twice.
So, 2 m is order m, so overall exploring the
neighbors across all n iteration takes time
O m. So, what this means is that, the first
iteration of visiting the marking everything
visited takes time O m, when we have a O n
loop, across which we do O m steps totally
across the n steps, so it is overall n plus
m. So, the complexity of the breadth first
search, if you are using an adjacency list,
it drops to O n plus m versus order n squared
for the adjacency matrix. So, if we have fewer
edges then it makes a lot of sense to use
adjacency list for breadth first search.
Now, in graphs the input size is typically
taken to the m and n. In other words, both
parameters are somewhat independent of each
other; because we could have the set of vertices
with very few edges with very many edges.
So, usually m and n together are taken to
be the input size. So, order m plus n is actually
a linear algorithm. So, this is the best possible,
because we have to read the input in order
to process it typically. So, in linear time,
we are able to do breadth first search.
So, we can do something more in breadth first
search, all we have identified is which vertices
are connected to the initial vertex one or
the source vertex in general from where you
start breadth first search. So, how do we
identify, how to go from the source vertex
to a given vertex. So, if we start at i and
BFS i sets visited j equal to 1, we know that
i and j are connected, but we do not know
the path.
So, what we can easily do is to remember,
where we marked each vertex from. So, when
we mark a vertex k as visited, it is marked
because it is a neighbor of some already visited
neighbor j. So, then we can say that k was
marked by j, we will use the word parent.
So, we will say that the parent of k is j,
then by following the parent links; we can
re-construct the path backwards from k to
the original source vertex.
So, this is very easy to do our code, so we
just have to add one line, or two lines. So,
initially we say that for every vertex the
parent is undefined. So, we might set the
value like minus 1, because we note that the
name of vertices are 1 to n, and then when
we mark a vertex, since we are exploring an
edge j k, the parent of k is going to be j.
So, we assign the parent of k equal to j,
the rest of the code is identical to the earlier
breadth first search, we just added this new
array parent to keep track of how we mark
the vertices. So, that we can re-constructs
the path.
So, we can go backward, so because k was mark
by j, j would be mark by some other thing
and so on. So, by just following these links
back, we can go back from any k to the start
vertex and therefore, we can reconstruct the
path. The other thing that we can do in breadth
first search is keep track of the level. So,
remember, we said that breadth first search
actually explores the graph level by level.
Looks at all the vertices which are one step
away from the source, then those vertices
that are one step away from these ones, so
they are at level 2, two steps away from the
source and so on. So, instead of just saying
that a vertex is visited, we can ask at what
level it was visit. So, initially we say that
all the levels are undefined, and then each
time we visit a new vertex, it is 1 level
more than the vertex from which it was visit.
So, eventually we say that, if level j is
assign some number p, it must be p steps away
from the original vertex.
So, this can also be easily added to our code
along with the parent code. So, last time,
we added this assignment for the parent. Now,
we also add the assignment for level, so we
say initially the level of each vertex is
undefined. So, it is some nonsensical value
like minus 1. Then, we say that the level
of the start vertex is 0, and now whenever
we visit a new vertex, if it is level, if
it is visited, then it must have a level.
So, if this level is minus 1, so its level
is minus 1, it means it is not visit, so level
minus 1 means not visited. Same as in our
earlier thing, same as visited k is 0 and
if so we adjust the level of k to be one more
than the level of j from which it was visited
and of course, we set the parent as before.
So, we can see all this works in our earlier
example, as usual we start with 1 and we mark
its level as 0 and it does not have a parent.
Now, when we add 2, 3 and 4 all of them will
be at level 1 and all of them will have as
parent 1, because they all were explore from
1. Then, as before 2 does not add anything
new to our list, 3 does not add anything new
to our list.
Now, 4 will add 5 and 8, so for these 2, the
level will be 2 and the parent will be 4,
indicating that I got to 5 and 8 from 4 in
my exploration. Then, from 5, I will get 6
and 7. So, these are now at level 3, because
5 was itself at level 2, therefore, 6 and
7 are at level 3 and their parents are 5,
from 8, I will go to 9, so 9 is also at level
3, because 8 was already at level 2, so 9
is level 3 and its parent is 8.
And finally, we will find that 10 is at level
4 and its parent is 9. So, now, we can trace
back. So, we can say that, I got from 10,
I came from 9, so 9 came from 8, so 8 came
from 4, 4 came from 1. So, the path is actually
10 to 9 to 8 to 4 to 1 and you can see indeed,
we have a path from 10 to 9 to 8 to 4 to 1.
So, this is how you can reconstruct the path
information and also the distance information
at the same time, when you are computing breadth
first search.
So, breadth first search if we add this level
predicate, it actually gives us the shortest
path to each node in terms of number of edges.
Now, in general, we will see that, if you
do not have a uniform cost, if we have different
costs on edges, then the shortest path need
not be just the shortest in terms of number
of edges. We have to add the cost associated
with each path these are called weighted graphs.
But, in an unweighted graph that is a graph
which just has simple edges the way we have
it now. Breadth first search has the added
advantage of computing the shortest path in
terms of number of edges from the source vertex
to every reachable vertex from it.